---
layout: default
title: Apostles Creed—The Incarnation of our Lord
---

Apostles Creed—The Incarnation of our Lord
==========================================

Compiled by Richard Jackson

| Relevant scriptures                                                         | Creed                                        |
| --------------------------------------------------------------------------- | -------------------------------------------- |
| Matt&nbsp;3:16--17, Jn&nbsp;3:16, Acts&nbsp;13:33[Ps&nbsp;2:7], Heb&nbsp;5:5 | And in Jesus Christ, His only Son, our Lord, |
| Matt&nbsp;1:18--25, Lk&nbsp;1:26--38, Is&nbsp;7:10--17                         | who was conceived by the Holy Spirit,        |
| Matt&nbsp;1:25--2:1, Lk&nbsp;2:7                                             | born of the virgin Mary,                     |
|                                                                             | suffered under Pontius Pilate,               |
|                                                                             | was crucified, died and was buried.          |

Different views on the Incarnation
----------------------------------

### SBC

Christ is the eternal Son of God. In His incarnation as Jesus Christ, He was
conceived of the Holy Spirit and born of the virgin Mary.  …He honored the
divine law by His personal obedience, and in His substitutionary death on the
cross, He made provision for the redemption of men from sin.

(Source: [Southern Baptist Convention website](http://www.sbc.net/aboutus/basicbeliefs.asp))

### Roman Catholicism

**479** At the time appointed by God, the only Son of the Father, the eternal
Word, that is, the Word and substantial Image of the Father, became incarnate;
without losing his divine nature he has assumed human nature. **480** Jesus
Christ is true God and true man, in the unity of his divine person; for this
reason he is the one and only mediator between God and men. **481** Jesus
Christ possesses two natures, one divine and the other human, not confused, but
united in the one person of God's Son.  **482** Christ, being true God and true
man, has a human intellect and will, perfectly attuned and subject to his
divine intellect and divine will, which he has in common with the Father and
the Holy Spirit. **483** The Incarnation is therefore the mystery of the
wonderful union of the divine and human natures in the one person of the Word.

(Source: [Catholic Catechism](http://www.vatican.va/archive/ccc_css/archive/catechism/p122a3p1.htm))

### WELS

For us the doctrine of the Virgin Birth is clearly set forth both in the
familiar prophecy of Isaiah, “Behold, a virgin shall conceive and bear a son”
(Isa. 7:14), and in the fulfillment recorded in the Gospels of Matthew and
Luke. After reporting Joseph’s distress at the discovery that Mary was with
child and the angel’s appearance to Joseph explaining that that which was
conceived in her was of the Holy Ghost, Matthew makes a special point of
adding, “Now all this was done, that it might be fulfilled which was spoken of
the Lord by the prophet, saying, Behold, a virgin shall be with child, and
shall bring forth a son, and they shall call his name Emanuel, which being
interpreted is, God with us” (Matt. 1:22,23). The argument of contemporary
theologians denying the Virgin Birth is no different from the contention of the
citizens of Nazareth. “Is not this the carpenter’s son?” they argued (Matt.
13:55).  Modern skeptics continue to recite the words of the Apostles’ Creed,
“born of the Virgin Mary,” but they make it clear that as far as they are
concerned Mary was not a virgin. They agree with the Ebionites of the second
century, who, according to Justin Martyr, taught that Jesus “was born a man
from men.”

(Source: [The Twentieth Century Crucifixion of Christ](http://essays.wls.wels.net/bitstream/handle/123456789/1773/GawrischCrucifixion.pdf?sequence=1&isAllowed=y))

### LCMS

The Incarnation is a mystery beyond human understanding.  Rationalists hold
that incarnation involved change that would have destroyed the Godhead.
Christian apologists reply: In the Incarnation the divine nature is the active,
as the human nature is the passive, factor; any change resulting from the act
will affect the human nature, not the divine. The
[Logos](http://cyclopedia.lcms.org/display.asp?t1=l&word=LOGOS) did not cease
to be God when He became flesh; He was made man, not changed into man.
Scripture continued to speak of the Logos incarnate in such a way that each
nature must be understood as retaining all its essential characteristics. In
Christ two complete natures are united in the personality of one of them (the
relation [between](http://cyclopedia.lcms.org/abbrev.asp?abbrev=ABBR.BET) body
and soul is [especially](http://cyclopedia.lcms.org/abbrev.asp?abbrev=ABBR.ESP)
weak as analogy). Generation of the man Jesus and union of the two natures were
simultaneous. The human nature of Christ never existed by itself; it was not
produced from the essence of the Holy Spirit, but, by His creative energy, from
the body of Mary. “Conceived by the Holy Ghost” denotes the efficient energy.
“Born of the Virgin Mary” denotes the material.

(Source: [Christian Cyclopedia](http://cyclopedia.lcms.org/display.asp?t1=i&word=INCARNATION))

### UMC

The Son, who is the Word of the Father, the very and eternal God, of one
substance with the Father, took man's nature in the womb of the blessed Virgin;
so that two whole and perfect natures, that is to say, the Godhead and Manhood,
were joined together in one person, never to be divided; whereof is one Christ,
very God and very Man, who truly suffered, was crucified, dead, and buried, to
reconcile his Father to us, and to be a sacrifice, not only for original guilt,
but also for actual sins of men.

(Source—[United Methodist Church website](http://www.umc.org/what-we-believe/the-articles-of-religion-of-the-methodist-church))

Relevant Heresies
-----------------

### Arianism

This heresy taught Jesus was a “creature” who was “begotten” of the Father.
Only God the Father is “un-begotten”. In this view, only the Father is truly
God; He was too pure and perfect to appear here on earth, so He created the Son
as His first creation. The Son then created the universe. God then adopted
Jesus as a son (because, after all Jesus and God are not supposed to have the
same nature in this view). Jesus was worshipped only because of His preeminence
as the first creation.

(Source: [Cold Case Christianity](http://coldcasechristianity.com/2014/historic-heresies-related-to-the-nature-of-jesus/))

### Nestorianism

This heresy taught Mary only gave birth to Jesus’ human nature. The founder of
the heresy, Nestorius, did not even want Mary to be called “Mother of God” but
instead wanted her to be called “Mother of Christ”. In essence, the heresy
maintained Jesus was really two separate persons, and only the human Jesus was
in Mary’s womb. If that was true, then Jesus was not God incarnate while in the
womb.

(Source: [Cold Case Christianity](http://coldcasechristianity.com/2014/historic-heresies-related-to-the-nature-of-jesus/))

### Docetism

This heresy was coined from the Greek word, “dokesis” which means “to seem”. It
taught Jesus only appeared to have a body and was not truly incarnate.
Docetists viewed matter as inherently evil, and therefore rejected the idea God
could actually appear in bodily form. By denying Jesus truly had a body, they
also denied He suffered on the cross and rose from the dead.

(Source: [Cold Case Christianity](http://coldcasechristianity.com/2014/historic-heresies-related-to-the-nature-of-jesus/))

### Adoptionism

This heresy denies the pre-existence of Christ and therefore denies His Deity.
It taught Jesus was simply a man who was tested by God and after passing the
test was given supernatural powers and adopted as a son (this occurred at His
baptism). Jesus was then rewarded for all He did (and for His perfect
character) with His own resurrection and adoption into the Godhead.

(Source: [Cold Case Christianity](http://coldcasechristianity.com/2014/historic-heresies-related-to-the-nature-of-jesus/))

### Mormonism

Mormons believe God created all things. We are his children.  Jesus and Satan
were both sons of God in the beginning, and thus it is technically correct that
Mormons believe Jesus and Satan *once were* brothers–in this sense.  However,
Jesus chose to honor and glorify his Father while Satan chose to rebel against
and dishonor Him.  Jesus and Satan are polar opposites–literally as different
as any two individuals can possibly be.  We too are all sons and daughters of
God, though you are just as related to Mother Theresa as you are to Adolf
Hitler.

(Source: [Mormonvoices.org](http://mormonvoices.org/1/jesus-brother-of-satan))

### Latter-day Saints

But both the scriptures and the prophets affirm that Jesus Christ and Lucifer
are indeed offspring of our Heavenly Father and, therefore, spirit brothers.
Jesus Christ was with the Father from the beginning. Lucifer, too, was an angel
“who was in authority in the presence of God,” a “son of the morning.” (See
[Isa.  14:12](https://www.lds.org/scriptures/ot/isa/14.12?lang=eng#11); [D&C
76:25–27](https://www.lds.org/scriptures/dc-testament/dc/76.25--27?lang=eng#24).)
Both Jesus and Lucifer were strong leaders with great knowledge and influence.
But as the Firstborn of the Father, Jesus was Lucifer’s older brother. (See
[Col.  1:15](https://www.lds.org/scriptures/nt/col/1.15?lang=eng#14); [D&C
93:21](https://www.lds.org/scriptures/dc-testament/dc/93.21?lang=eng#20).)

(Source: [Latter-Day Saints website](https://www.lds.org/ensign/1986/06/i-have-a-question?lang=eng))

### Islam

“People of the Book (Jews and Christians)! Do not exceed the limits in your
religion, and attribute to God nothing except the truth.  The Messiah, Jesus,
son of Mary, was only a Messenger of God, and His command that He conveyed unto
Mary, and a spirit from Him. So believe in God and in His Messengers, and do
not say: ‘God is a Trinity.' Give up this assertion; it would be better for
you. God is indeed just One God.  Far be it from His glory that He should have
a son. To Him belongs all that is in the heavens and in the earth. God is
sufficient for a guardian" (Quran 4:171)

"Say: "God is Unique! God, the Source \[of everything\]. He has not fathered
anyone nor was He fathered, and there is nothing comparable to Him!" (Quran
112:1--4).

"Such was Jesus, the son of Mary; it is a statement of truth, about which they
vainly dispute. It is not befitting to the majesty of God, that He should beget
a son. Glory be to Him! When He determines a matter, He only says to it, ‘Be'
and it is" (Quran 19:34--35).

(Source: [SoundVision.com](http://www.soundvision.com/article/a-comparison-of-the-islamic-and-christian-views-of-jesus))

Immaculate Conception
---------------------

### Roman Catholic Teaching

The Immaculate Conception means that Mary, whose conception was brought about
the normal way, was conceived without original sin or its stain—that’s what
"immaculate" means: without stain. The essence of original sin consists in the
deprivation of sanctifying grace, and its stain is a corrupt nature. Mary was
preserved from these defects by God’s grace; from the first instant of her
existence she was in the state of sanctifying grace and was free from the
corrupt nature original sin brings.

(Source: [Catholic Answers](https://www.catholic.com/tract/immaculate-conception-and-assumption))

“Wherefore, in humility and fasting, we unceasingly offered our private prayers
as well as the public prayers of the Church to God the Father through his Son,
that he would deign to direct and strengthen our mind by the power of the Holy
Spirit. In like manner did we implore the help of the entire heavenly host as
we ardently invoked the Paraclete.  Accordingly, by the inspiration of the Holy
Spirit, for the honor of the Holy and undivided Trinity, for the glory and
adornment of the Virgin Mother of God, for the exaltation of the Catholic
Faith, and for the furtherance of the Catholic religion, by the authority of
Jesus Christ our Lord, of the Blessed Apostles Peter and Paul, and by our own:
"We declare, pronounce, and define that the doctrine which holds that the most
Blessed Virgin Mary, in the first instance of her conception, by a singular
grace and privilege granted by Almighty God, in view of the merits of Jesus
Christ, the Savior of the human race, was preserved free from all stain of
original sin, is a doctrine revealed by God and therefore to be believed firmly
and constantly by all the faithful."

Hence, if anyone shall dare--which God forbid!--to think otherwise than as has
been defined by us, let him know and understand that he is condemned by his own
judgment; that he has suffered shipwreck in the faith; that he has separated
from the unity of the Church; and that, furthermore, by his own action he
incurs the penalties established by law if he should dare to express in words
or writing or by any other outward means the errors he think in his heart.”

(Source: [Apostolic Constitution of Pope Pius IX solemnly defining the dogma of the Immaulate Conception, 8 December 1854](https://www.ewtn.com/faith/teachings/marye1.htm))

### Lutheran Teaching

The dialogue participants identify the two modern Marian dogmas—the Immaculate
Conception, defined in 1854, and the Assumption, defined in 1950-- as the two
most difficult areas regarding Mary (? 86). Lutherans object to the Immaculate
Conception based on the Scriptural teachings asserted in the Augsburg
Confession (2:1) "that all descendants of Adam and Eve except Christ are
'conceived and born in sin'; that Scripture nowhere teaches that Mary was born
without sin; and that "the definition itself was an unwarranted assertion of
papal authority" (? 87). Similar Lutheran objections are raised to the dogma of
the Assumption (? ? 88, 89).

(Source: [LCMS-RC Discussion response](https://www.google.com/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=2&ved=0ahUKEwjt8ey2pe7RAhVK7IMKHYpyCKwQFggiMAE&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.lcms.org%2FDocument.fdoc%3Fsrc%3Dlcm%26id%3D328&usg=AFQjCNFGYPUTwcAZhQBUWlL5UZRfs6k0UQ))

### Methodist teaching

The United Methodist Church does not subscribe to the doctrine of the
Immaculate Conception. John Wesley and others in the Anglican Church and the
non-conforming Protestant churches of England held negative views of some Roman
Catholic doctrine and practice, thus this teaching is not part of our doctrinal
heritage.

(Source: [UMC website](http://www.umc.org/what-we-believe/what-does-the-united-methodist-church-teach-about-the-immaculate-conception))

### SBC

I am afraid the doctrine of Mary’s immaculate conception and sinless life not
only has no warrant in Scripture, it also stands at odds with the gospel
itself. Paul declares in 1 Timothy 2:5, “For there is one God, and there is one
mediator between God and men, the man Christ Jesus.” But the Roman Catholic
teaching about Mary’s unique status as the sinless, and therefore only
qualified, vessel of the Incarnation places her in a role of mediation
alongside her Son.  Furthermore, calling Mary the ark of the new covenant
places undue emphasis on the fetal life of Jesus, obscuring the redemptive
significance of the cross itself. Jesus does not save us from the womb of his
mother. After nine months there, he exited her womb so that he could fulfill
the mission for which he had become a man in the first place.

(Source: [Theological Training website](https://theologicaltraining.wordpress.com/2016/12/15/the-immaculate-conception/))
