---
layout: default
title: Lunchbox theology discussion notes for 2018-01-24
---

Lunchbox theology discussion notes for 2018-01-24
=================================================

Prepared by Travis Scholten

[*Biblical Series I: Introduction to the Idea of
God*](https://youtu.be/f-wWBGo6a2w), by Jordan Peterson

Dr. Peterson is a trained psychologist and is deeply interested in what
he calls “the architecture of belief”. He makes clear that his approach
to understanding the Biblical stories is going to be grounded in
empirical, rational thought as much as possible, while acknowledging
there are many aspects of both the Bible and human behavior that are (as
yet) beyond the reach of such methods.

*&gt; Does approaching the Bible in such a fashion resonate with you?
How so?*

Peterson observes that the values and culture of Western Civilization
are derived from Christian ideals that were developed in medieval
Europe. As such, it behooves us to understand the Bible, so that we can
understand the ideas that form the foundation of Western Civilization.

*&gt; In what way(s) is this reason (in and of itself) a good reason to
study the Bible?*

*&gt; How do you see ideals laid out in the Bible made manifest in our
Civilization today?*

As a corollary to this observation, Peterson argues that it follows that
if the ideals contained within the Bible are no longer practiced by
members of Western Civilization, then Western Civilization *as such*
cannot long endure.

*&gt; In what way(s) do people in Western Civilization no longer
practice the ideals laid out in the Bible? Do you see evidence of a
decline or decay our Civilization as a result?*

*&gt; How does incorporating more rationality in one’s worldview enable
one to lead a better life? How do you balance between purely rational
explanations of the world and its phenomena, and more
divine/transcendent explanations?*

Certain events of the 20th century, such as the rise of Nazi Party in
Germany, or Stalin in the USSR, or Mao Zedong in China, are used by
Peterson as examples of what goes wrong when morality is co-opted by a
purely rational approach to living. (He calls this “replacing the ‘dream
state’ with a rational, but incomplete, system”.) He argues that such an
approach inevitably gives rise to totalitarian states.

*&gt; Given what you know about these historical events, how does that
critique of totalitarianism sit with you?*

*&gt; Critics of Christian thought rightfully point out events such as
the Crusades as examples of failings on the part of Christian states. In
what ways are the similar to or different from, the acts committed by
totalitarian states in the 20th century?*

Peterson characterizes the Bible as a document that exists between “the
dream” (mythological knowledge) and “articulated knowledge” (historical
fact). He further presents the Biblical stories as representing the
lived experience of human beings, as opposed to a description of
objective truths about the world.

*&gt; How do you approach the Biblical stories? How do you determine
whether any story is mythological or historical in nature?*

*&gt; What is lost (gained) in interpreting the Bible as an objective
(mythological) document?*

Building on this thesis, Peterson describes the process by which humans
arrived at the idea of God as one where we first observe people who
“live properly in the world”, then sets of people who do so, and
finally, extract from their actions a guiding principle for how to live
our own lives.

*&gt; What do you think is the way to figure out if you are “living
properly in the world”? How do you know you are not?*

*&gt; How can viewing God as simply an “abstracted ideal” help (or
hinder) our ability to understand Him and His nature?*

In his discussion of Genesis 1:1, Peterson begins with John 1:1: “In the
beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was
God.”. Peterson characterizes “the Word” (in the figure of Christ) as
representing consciousness, and argues that consciousness has a role in
constituting reality.

*&gt; How do you make sense of the idea that God created the world out
of nothing? In what way(s) do we share in the act of creation? How are
our creations different from those of God?*
